What topics do you cover?
What specific topics do you cover?
What specific topics do you teach?
What specific topics do you talk about?
What specific topics do you know?
What can you tell me about searching?
What about A*?
What about AStar?
Tell me about an informed search algorithm.
Tell me what an informed search is.
How does Astar work?
How does A* work?
Prove A* always chooses the most optimal choice.
What are some searching algorithms?
What is General Tree search?
How does General tree search work?
How does generaltree search work?
What is the general tree search algorithm?
What are the average run times for General tree search?
What are the average run times for general tree search algorithm?
Tell me about a search algorithm.
What is breadth-first search?
What is breadth first search?
How does Breadth-First search work?
How does breadth first search work?
What is the breadth first search algorithm?
What are the average run times for breadth-first search?
What are the average run times for Breadth First search algorithm?
What is Uniform-cost search?
What is Uniform cost search?
How does Uniform-Cost search work?
How does uniform cost search work?
What is the Uniform Cost search algorithm?
What are the average run times for Uniform-cost search?
What are the average run times for uniform cost search algorithm?
What is Depth-first search?
What is Depth first search?
How does Depth-first search work?
How does Depth first search work?
What is the Depth first search algorithm?
What are the average run times for Depth-first search?
What are the average run times for depth first search algorithm?
What is Depth-limited search?
What is Depth limited search?
How does Depth-limited search work?
How does Depth limited search work?
What is the Depth limited search algorithm?
What are the average run times for Depth-limited search?
What are the average run times for depth limited search algorithm?
What is Iterative deepening search?
What is Iterative-deepening search?
How does Iterative deepening search work?
How does Iterative-deepening search work?
What is the Iterative deepening search algorithm?
What are the average run times for Iterative deepening search?
What are the average run times for Iterative deepening search algorithm?
What areas of AI are you implementing?
What are you made of?
What specific AI algorithms are used to create you?
What is an informed search?
How do informed searches work?
What is a heuristic function?
What is a heuristic?
what is a relaxed problem?
Tell me about pattern databases
What is the schedule for the class?
What if I have disabilities?
What about late work?
What project is to be finished for this class?
Who is the professor of this class?
Does this class have a professor?
How can I contact the professor?
How can I contact him?
How does grading work in this class?
What are the views on AI?
How many approaches are there to AI?
What approaches are there to AI?
Tell me about cognitive modeling.
Tell me about the simulation approach.
Tell me about the logicist approach.
tell me about the rational agents approach.
What is PEAS?
what is peas?
what is intelligence?
Are you intelligent?